---
description: >-
  This lesson establishes the basic concepts in CRANQ's flavor of dataflow
  programming: nodes, connections, signals, parameters, and tags. What they are,
  and how to use them.
---

# 102: Nodes & connections

CRANQ, as a programming language, is based on a special flavor of [dataflow programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dataflow\_programming).

:bulb: The simplest illustration of dataflow programming is doing laundry:

1. You take dirty clothes (signal) to the washing machine (node), where they get clean and wet (state changes).
2. Then you put the clean, wet clothes (output from previous node) into the dryer (another node), where they become dry and wrinkled (state changes again).
3. Finally, you iron (node) the dry, wrinkled clothes (last output), and end up with unwrinkled ones (final output).

## Node

The Node is _the_ unit of processing in CRANQ. It takes data from [signals](103.md#signal) and [parameters](103.md#parameter) through input [ports](103.md#port), processes the data, and sends the result via output [ports](103.md#port).

Most nodes have internal _structure_ made up of _child_ nodes and connections between them. Some nodes, especially the most fundamental ones, are implemented using text code, like JavaScript.

Nodes may or may not have internal _state_. The ones that do, like database connectors, are somewhat harder to test and debug, so it's a good idea to keep the number of stateful nodes to a minimum.

### Prototypes and instances

Reusing nodes is very important because that's how we speed up development both for ourselves and for others.

Reusable nodes are called _prototype_s.

When we [add a node from the repo](basics/102/#step-2-add-nodes-from-the-repo), we're actually reusing a node. A node in the repo is therefore always a prototype - and when dragged to the canvas it becomes an _instance_ of a node.

Node instances inherit every property of the prototype - ports, data types, structure, and code - but in addition to these, they can also have parameter values (see [below](103.md#parameter)) set on their input ports. Instances can only exist in the context of a programme, whereas prototypes live in the repo without context.&#x20;

:bulb: If you've used [Sketch](https://www.sketch.com/) or [Figma](https://www.figma.com/) before, this concept may already be familiar. In Sketch, reusable elements are called _symbols_; in Figma - _components_, and they work pretty much the same way as prototypes do in CRANQ.

:information\_source: In CRANQ, we also call prototypes components sometimes.

## Port

Where nodes receive and send data. Data enters nodes through _input_ ports, either as [signals](103.md#signal), or [parameters](103.md#parameter), then signals (and signals only) leave via _output_ ports.

Ports have data types associated with them, which helps determining whether a parameter or a connected port is compatible.

Data types in CRANQ must be compatible with [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON), including strings, numbers, boolean (true / false), null, arrays, and dictionaries.

## Connection

Transmits [signals](103.md#signal) from an output port to the connected input port. It also propagates the [parameter](103.md#parameter) set on a parent node's input port to a connected child node's input port.

:bulb: Traffic flowing through connections can be observed by right clicking on the connection and selecting "Show traffic".

## Signal

A unit of data in flow. Signals traverse from output ports to connected input ports. Output ports emit signals, connections transmit them, and input ports receive them.

A signal is made up of JSON data and a [tag](103.md#tag). This is important because in CRANQ, it doesn't matter in what order and when exactly signals are received. So in order to determine which signals belong together, we need some extra information - this is the tag.

## Tag

Identifies the origin of a signal.

The concept of the tag is the secret sauce in CRANQ's flavor of dataflow programming. Its primary purpose is [synchronization](../how-to/basic/synchronizing-signals.md) of signals that "go together". For instance, in the case of a node that adds two numbers together (eg. `number/Adder`), the two independent input signals must be recognized as a pair, so the node can calculate their sum. In cases like that, the output inherits the tag of the corresponding inputs.

:wrench: The tag serves other purposes, eg. indicating signal multiplicity at runtime. Typically, nodes that iterate over an array or dictionary, emit signals for each iteration with unique tags, so that synchronization of those signals remain consistent.

Any given port, in optimal circumstances, would not receive or send a signal with the same tag more than once during the program's lifecycle. When they do, it usually a sign of potential bugs.

:bulb: In most cases nodes send their output with the input signal's original tag.

## Parameter

A unit of static data. Instead of receiving them at runtime, parameters are applied once at compile time. Because parameters have no role at runtime, they don't have tags associated with them.

Parameters set on parent nodes' input ports propagate via connections to child nodes' input ports.

:exclamation: Input ports can't have both a parameter set and receive signals through a connection. In the CRANQ app, setting a parameter will remove any connection on the affected input port, and likewise, making a connection will clear any parameter set on it.
